mental-models: Pyramid (#14)
guillaumewuip/guillaumewuip.github.io: _mentalModels/2021-09-26-pyramid.md

---
title: The Pyramid

draft: false

page : false 

image: /assets/img/mental-models/pyramid.svg

excerpt: >
  The Pyramid is a great metaphorical Mental Model to reflect on codebases.

>   With Pyramid in mind we see code arranged in blocks and layers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The Pyramid is a great metaphorical mental model to reflect on codebases.
  With the Pyramid in mind we see code arranged in blocks and layers.
```

---

<img
  alt="A schematic pyramid with a flag on top"
  src="/assets/img/mental-models/pyramid.svg"
  style="max-height: 480px; margin: 2rem auto"
/>

The Pyramid is a great metaphorical Mental Model to reflect on _codebases._ With

> Pyramid in mind we see code arranged in blocks and layers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Pyramid is a great metaphorical mental model to reflect on _codebases._ With
the Pyramid in mind we see code arranged in blocks and layers.
```
Techniquement le P majuscule de Pyramid est de trop aussi.

Reviewer: Mais ça peut être un choix de style !

Author: Ouais je vais le garder mais que sur Pyramid du coup

---

One can say any codebase has at least one mission. It can provide a product
interface and its features, expose an API or generate some data. This is what

> the user see from the codebase. It's the flag put on top of the Pyramid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any codebase has at least one mission, whether it is providing a product
interface and its features, exposing an API or generating some data. The mission is the value
users extracts from the codebase. It's the important part, it's the flag at the top of the Pyramid.
```

The Pyramid's blocks are not exposed directly. They _supports_ the flag. They

> support the mission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The lower blocks of the Pyramid are not exposed directly to the users of the codebase. They _support_ the flag. They support the mission.
```

Reviewer: Tu pourrais illustrer ça aussi avec une ligne de flottaison, peut-être

Author: mmh j'ai introduit le drapeau pour ça : drapeau = mission, pyramid = cachée. Je vais tenter de reformuler

---

The metaphor sometimes takes a few liberties with reality. It happens when

> discussing engineering strategies related to complex migrations or tech debt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The metaphor inevitably takes a few liberties with reality. It is obvious when
discussing engineering strategies related to complex migrations or tech debt.
```

Reviewer: IMO le passage est dispensable.

Let's say we're removing Redux from the codebase. In such a situation, seeing

> the affected codebase like a Pyramid is helpful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say we're removing Redux from the codebase while seeing the affected codebase as a Pyramid.
```

The flag - the mission - should not change. And we can't update a block at a

> given level until we've migrated lower blocks they depend on first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The flag - the mission - cannot change. And because each block depends on its neighbour, and each layer on the one underneath, we can't update a block at a
given level until we've migrated the lower blocks they depend on first.
```

> So what do we do? We update our Pyramid starting at the bottom - don't do this
> with real pyramids!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So what do we do? The only thing we can to keep the structure safe. We update our Pyramid starting at the bottom.
```

En vrai...pourquoi 'faut pas faire ça avec une vraie ? J'suis pas expert en rénovation de pyramides hein, mais c'est pas aussi logique que ça. ?

Author: Tu peux pas trop retirer un bloc en bas de la pyramide comme ça aha, les autres au dessus pèsent un peu dessus

Reviewer: On retire pas, on refacto !

Reviewer: `update` ≠ `remove`. Du coup si on reprend la vraie pyramide, si on veut par exemple juste repeindre les pierres, tu peux commencer par en bas. Bon c'est un peu con pour les coulées, mais c'est pas impossible. Mais en vrai c'est un détail, sur ma première lecture j'ai pas du tout tilté.

<img
  alt="Four stapes of a pyramid going from black to green"
  src="/assets/img/mental-models/pyramid-migration.svg"
  style="margin: 2rem auto"
/>

We first migrate the most lower-level blocks while we continue supporting
upper-level blocks. We give them a similar-enough API to continue working
without refactoring needed. Then, we go up layer after layer, following the

> dependency chain. Until, finally, having migrated the full codebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We migrate the lowest-level blocks first while we keep supporting
the upper-levels. We give them a similar-enough API to continue working
without (much) intervention. We progressively go up layer after layer, following the
dependency chain. When we see the flag again, we'll have migrated the full codebase.
```

---
title: The Pyramid

draft: false

page : false 

image: /assets/img/mental-models/pyramid.svg

excerpt: >
  The Pyramid is a great metaphorical mental model to reflect on codebases.
  With the Pyramid in mind we see code arranged in blocks and layers.

---

<img
  alt="A schematic pyramid with a flag on top"
  src="/assets/img/mental-models/pyramid.svg"
  style="max-height: 480px; margin: 2rem auto"
/>

The Pyramid is a great metaphorical mental model to reflect on _codebases._ With
the Pyramid in mind we see code arranged in blocks and layers.

---

Any codebase has at least one mission, whether it's providing a product
interface and its features, exposing an API or generating some data. The mission

> is the value users extract from the codebase. It's the flag put on top of the
> Pyramid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is the value users extract from the codebase. It's the flag on top of the
Pyramid.
```

The Pyramid itself is not exposed directly to the users. It _supports_ the flag.
It supports the mission.

---

The metaphor sometimes takes a few liberties with reality. What's the difference
between a software Pyramid and a real one? 

> Blocks in a real Pyramid are subject to the gravity. They are constrained by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blocks in a real Pyramid are subject to gravity. They are constrained by
```

> the weight of upper layer blocks. The higher the block the freest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the weight of upper layer blocks. The highest blocks are also the freest.
```
C'est legal freest, mais je me demande si "most free" ne serait pas plus compréhensible... Freest ça fait un peu vieil anglois.

> Blocks in a software Pyramid are subject to dependency *coupling*. The freest
> blocks are the lower ones, having no dependency in the codebase. The most
> constrained blocks are the highest one, coupled indirectly to the full codebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blocks in a software Pyramid are subject to dependency *coupling*. The freest
blocks are the lowest ones, having no dependency in the codebase. The most
constrained blocks are the highest one: they are indirectly coupled to the full codebase.
```
